---
title   : "Vernacular Patterns in Portugal and Brazil: Evolution and Possible Adaptations"
lang    : "en-GB"
csl     : "_csl/chicago-fullnote-bibliography-with-ibid.csl"
suppress-bibliography: true
abstract: |
  Traditional towns in Portugal and Brazil have evolved, since the
  thirteenth century, a finely tuned coordination between, on the one
  hand, modular dimensions for street widths and lot sizes, and on the
  other, a typology of room shapes and distributions within houses.
  Despite being well documented in urban history, this coordination was,
  during the past century, often interpreted as contingent and as a
  result of the limited material means of pre-industrial societies.
  Nevertheless, the continued application and gradual adaptation of
  these urban and architectural patterns throughout periods of
  industrialization and economic development suggests they respond to
  both long-lasting housing requirements and piecemeal urban growth.
  This article surveys the persistence of urban and architectural
  patterns since the mid nineteenth century, showing their resilience in
  addressing the requirements of modern housing and urbanisation. It
  concludes with a conceptual exercise using these traditional patterns
  to rehabilitate a contemporary fringe belt.
Keywords:
- Vernacular architecture
- Portugal
- Brazil
- Procedural typology
- Resilience
ccsLabelSep: ' – '
---

Introduction
============

In this article, I examine emergent order patterns of urban development
in the vernacular traditions of the Portuguese speaking world with the
potential to inspire resilient and sustainable policies in contemporary
practice. I aim to identify bodies of knowledge, practices, and
regulations prevalent from the mid eighteenth to the mid twentieth
century that offer examples of decentralised economic and regulatory
controls over urban space, resulting in emergent order systems. I put
forward the hypothesis that theses core principles of traditional
urbanism in the Portuguese speaking world provide a viable alternative
to corporate takeover and to the ineffectiveness of overly standardised
public policies for solving the ills of uncontrolled urban growth in
Brazil.

The rapid urban growth in the global South since the twentieth century
has been addressed, predominantly, by means of theories and policies
stressing centralised planning and economies of scale by both
governments and the private sector. In Brazil, the enactment of a 'one
size fits all' federal law on urban policy, nearly twenty years ago, is
acknowledged to have resulted in the spread of boilerplate zoning codes
across medium sized towns, as well as in massive public--private
partnerships that have effectively outsourced urban planning to large
corporations or even to banks. This has come at the expense both of
democratic policy-making and of the agency of peripheral actors, such as
small builders and communities excluded from formal land ownership.

In contrast, traditional Portuguese urbanism is predicated on few
abstract regulations and, most important, a shared body of knowledge
made up of both vernacular and 'classical' principles. Most planning
decisions were, of necessity, entrusted to engineers on the ground,
acting on general guidelines set out by local or central authorities,
especially in the broad expanses of colonial Brazil. Standard modules
for such design decisions as the laying out of street widths or block
and lot sizes were widely understood by builders. In spite of the
high-profile urban renewal and expansion projects of the late nineteenth
century, modelled after Haussmann's Paris or Anglo-American garden
cities, much of the urban fabric in Brazil continued to be laid out in
the same piecemeal fashion of Portuguese tradition, well into the
twentieth century if not until the present.

Rather than considering the peripheral survival of traditional urbanism
as an inconsequential holdout at the margins of progress, I propose to
assert its legitimacy as a means to achieve resilient and sustainable
cities within the socio-economic reality of Brazil. I do so by
documenting its historical patterns, with an emphasis on vernacular and
decentralised responses to rapid urbanisation and to the programmes of
working class housing from the mid nineteenth century onwards. This
general aim will be achieved by establishing a typological series of
traditional urban fabrics, evidencing the persistence and slow
transformation of urban forms and building patterns.

The documentation for this research has drawn on mainly graphical
evidence of urban areas in Brazil, as well as of comparable examples in
Portugal. These graphical sources have been collected from earlier
research, municipal planning offices, and a few are extant historic
drawings from original plans or later surveys that were preserved in
archives. A number of new towns and urban extensions from the mid to
late nineteenth century, laid out by engineers, surveyors, and builders,
provide evidence of the continued use of traditional modules and of the
adaptation of these modules to local conditions. Because there are few
extant drawings from much of the nineteenth century, discerning these
modules involves reconstructing original land subdivision patterns from
present-day conditions.

The empirical methods of the British and Italian schools of urban
morphology are more promising for the reconstruction of genealogies of
patterns and processes of typological development. These methods
can provide indirect hints to poorly documented features such
as socio-economic arrangements, and in turn establish the continuity and
resilience of urban patterns. The Italian 'school' of procedural
typology provides a significant part of the theoretical groundwork
regarding the possibility of establishing morphological genealogies of
vernacular and traditional urban patterns.

The persistence of spatial and topological relationships among
elements---general lot shapes, block arrangements and configurations,
and street and square hierarchies---can then be extrapolated from the
documentation. The goal of this analysis is not only to derive *local*
morphological and syntactic patterns, but also to extrapolate
similarities and typologies prevalent *among* several urban
developments.

Portuguese urban development modules up to the eighteenth century
=================================================================

Portugal is part of the former Roman imperial province of Lusitania,
later ruled by successive waves of Germanic and North African nobility.
As such, she is representative to some degree of the broader trends in
urban history of the western Mediterranean region. Roman agrarian
colonies [@caniggia:1997analisi] have not made an imprint on the
Portuguese landscape strong enough to condition later development;
therefore, as in most of western Europe, the default Portuguese urban
type is the linear village around a high street [@panerai:2012analyse].

In Fernandes's reconstruction of the ideal type, the village coalesces
around a focal point or landmark, such as a chapel, a market, or the
access to a castle [@fernandes:2014fundacao]. In the high street scheme
([@Fig:highstreet]), the very deep lots around the main thoroughfare
(*rua da frente*) have secondary frontages that establish a back street
(*rua de trás*) on either side, as described by Teixeira
[-@teixeira:2012forma]. A sequence of cross streets develops to link
these parallel roads, forming large urban blocks. These blocks are
eventually broken up by alleys (*travessas*) linking the cross streets,
enabling the mature, dense build-up of the town core
[@fernandes:2014fundacao]. Since most Portuguese urban areas originate
in hill towns, the high street often takes the form of a spindle, with a
binary network of main thoroughfares, further adding diversity to the
urban fabric. This system forms hierarchical networks of streets and
urban districts---each one a 'block of blocks', as it were, according to
Orr[^1]---that are able to support diverse uses and social classes
within relatively small areas.

![Conceptual model of the development of a Portuguese high street village. Author's drawing, after @panerai:2006analise and @fernandes:2014fundacao](){#fig:highstreet}

In the thirteenth century, Portuguese kings begin a policy of populating
and fortifying their borders through the foundation of new
towns---*vilas novas* or *vilas reais*---, akin to the French and
English *bastides* in southern France and to the *villas reales* in
Castille and León. Trindade has shown these Portuguese new towns operate
on similar planning principles as their better known European kin
[@trindade:2009urbanismo]. The Portuguese *vila nova* can be said to be
a fortified high street village with a regular geometric plan and
controlled allotment of land. Caminha on a promontory along the norther
border, one of the earliest and best preserved examples, is organised
around a straight high street, two back streets and two cross streets.
The whole is encircled by a wall. As in many *bastides*, the parish
church is sited away from the central crossing and placed near one of
the gates, where it can be reached easily from the surrounding
countryside. The market square and town hall are located at the opposite
end of the high street ([@Fig:caminha]). Though there is a geometric
principle behind the plan, its implementation is clearly dictated by
expediency over a punctilious observance of orthogonality, and the edges
of the town are required to bend to the military requirements of the
fortifications adjusted to the terrain.

![Reconstructed town plan of Caminha, thirteenth century. [@trindade:2009urbanismo, 157]](){#fig:caminha}

The *vila nova* layout establishes and observes certain geometric
procedures to ensure regularity and the equal distribution of urban
lots. These urban plans are executed in a modular scheme based on whole
number ratios of the traditional Portuguese measurement unit: the hand,
or *palmo* (abbreviated to 'p.'), equal to about 22.5 centimetres. 5 p.
equal one Portuguese yard or *vara*, thus measuring 1.12 metre. The
*vara* seems, in fact, to be the least module effectively used in most
urban plans. At Caminha, according to the reconstruction proposed by
Trindade ([@Fig:caminha-modules]), the basic elements of the urban
design are 15 p.-wide streets (3.37 metres) and lots 25 p. (5.62 metres)
wide by 60 to 75 p. (13.5 to 16.87 metres) deep
[@trindade:2009urbanismo, 323-328].

![Reconstructed modular platting of Caminha, thirteenth century. [@trindade:2009urbanismo, 328]](){#fig:caminha-modules}

Other commonly used lot frontage dimensions are 20 p. (4.5 metres) and
30 p. (6.75 metres). This range of variations offers lot sizes
convenient for a diversity of use cases, from tiny houses---often with
no more than one or two square rooms---to aristocratic terraces or
flats. As is the case in many Mediterranean building traditions,
Portuguese urban house types are various arrangements of roughly square
cells, up to 30 p. in length. The most common plan types for a 20 to
25 p. wide lot are either simple dwellings or shops with a longitudinal
*enfilade* of up to three cells, or a differentiated arrangement of two
large rooms at the front and back, with a string of small alcoves in
between, accessed from a side hallway ([@Fig:plans]).

![Two traditional Portuguese house types. Author's drawing](){#fig:plans}

Relatively wide and shallow lots 30 p. wide by 60 p. deep are a
particular standard of rural subdivision in Portugal, known as *chão*
[@carita:1994bairro]. Because of this, they figure prominently in the
suburban expansion of cities, such as in Lisbon's sixteenth century
*extramuros* development known as the *bairro Alto* [@carita:1994bairro,
47-48]. Two 30 × 60 p. lots can be conveniently subdivided into three
20 p. lots for low-income housing or grouped to support a courtyard
block of flats or an aristocratic house ([@Fig:chao]); the latter case
is attested in the bairro Alto during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, whereas the former occurs in nineteenth century suburban
subdivisions in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil).

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {#fig:chao .subfigures}
![Terrace house on a single lot](){#fig:chaoA}

![Three small houses on two subdivided lots](){#fig:chaoB}

![Courtyard block on two consolidated lots](){#fig:chaoC}

Development types of the 30 × 60 p. *chão* lot. Author's drawing
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Transitional urban types
========================

The foundation of *vilas reais* sees a resurgence in the third quarter
of the eighteenth century. A protracted animosity with Spain, for
reasons of colonial dominance and dynastic legitimacy, sees king D. José
I (1750--1777) and his first minister, the marquis of Pombal, keen on
asserting the political and territorial integrity of Portugal. A string
of new towns founded during this reign near every Spanish--Portuguese
border---in both Europe and South America---signifies Portugal's ability
to effectively control the territories claimed by her
[@delson:1998novas], in addition to responding to new ideas about the
'rational' organisation of the territory, already being put in place by
Spain [@oliveras:1998nuevas].

Portuguese new towns such as Vila Real de Santo António
([@Fig:vilareal]), on the mouth of the Guadiana river in the Iberian
peninsula, exhibit both the persistance of traditional land subdivision
patterns and the changes brought about in the concept of 'rational'
planning. Vila Real de Santo António, founded in 1773, is laid out
around a single central square around which both the town hall and the
parish church are located; the market has its own, dedicated building
away from this, now exclusively civic, space. Here, unlike at Caminha,
the engineers make it a point to adhere strictly the gridiron plan: it
helps that the town is intended as a residential garrison and commercial
harbour, while the actual fortifications are sited on higher ground.

![Plan of Vila Real de Santo António, eighteenth-century drawing](){#fig:vilareal}

To facilitate the movement of troops and goods, but also to highlight
the clarity and monumentality of the plan, the streets are much broader
than in the thirteenth century new towns: at 40 p. across, they are more
than double the breadth of the Caminha streets and rather oversized for
the single story houses in the original plan. Also, due to the layout
focusing on the central square, a generous 350 p. across, the street
hierarchy of older planned towns is lost in Vila Real de Santo António.
Despite all these transformations in the eighteenth century attitudes
towards urban design, lot sizes display remarkably little change. The
same 25 p. frontages are used in thirteenth century Caminha and in
eighteenth century Vila Real de Santo António, with only a slight
reduction in depth, from 60 to 50 p. The exact same dimensions for the
central square and lot frontages are used in the 1773 town plan for São
Luiz do Paraitinga, a highway stop on the road to the Brazilian gold
mines [@derntl:2013metodo]. Street sections are, however, somewhat less
consistent, ranging from 40 p. at Vila Real de Santo António to 60 p. at
São Luiz do Paraitinga---a generous breadth first attempted in the
post-earthquake rebuilding of Lisbon---and up to 100 p. elsewhere in
colonial Brazil [@derntl:2013metodo].

These eighteenth century efforts at rationalising the territory by means
of carefully placed and planned new towns are also remarkable in that
they seem to be the first designs, in Portugal, to mandate specific
building types or the placement of houses. Such matters appear to have
been understood as self-evident or less relevant in earlier periods. The
project for the rebuilding of Lisbon sets the trend here, associating
the regularity of the new city blocks and lots with the uniformity of
mandated façades [@franca:1989reconstrucao]. Similarly, a number of
surviving drawings for new outposts in the Brazilian frontiers, such as
that of Taquari, in the south ([@Fig:taquari]), establish simple façade
designs that let one guess the single room layout behind them.

![Plan of the garrison town of S. José on the Tabiquary river, now town of Taquari, Brazil, by Manoel Vieira Leão, c. 1777. Arquivo Histórico do Exército (Rio de Janeiro)](){#fig:taquari}

Centralised territorial planning in Portugal and Brazil comes to a
sudden halt at the death of D. José I in 1777, not to resume for almost
a century thereafter. Nevertheless, singular designs for new towns or
extensions during this lull do carry on the principles and modules of
Portuguese tradition. Royal and imperial new towns in Brazil, such as
Niterói (1819) and Petrópolis (1843), evidence the continued use of
eighteenth century military engineering principles, with strictly
geometric layouts. As late as the 1850s, two new provincial capitals in
Brazil, Teresina and Aracaju (@Fig:aracaju]), are planned using the
eighteenth century module of 60 p. wide streets forming a gridiron
around a main square facing the river.

![Aracaju, Brazil. Plan by Sebastião Basílio Pirro, 1854](){#fig:aracaju}

Building types and fringe belt redevelopment
============================================

The mid nineteenth century urban growth of Rio de Janeiro also shows
evidence of the persistance of traditional modules. A large swath of
public land, the *rossio*, west of the city centre is developed during
the first half of the nineteenth century according to these modules: its
streets are 25, 30, and 100 p. in breadth, and blocks are subdivided,
whenever pre-existing conditions allow, into 20 p. lots ([@Fig:gotto]).
This area grows into one of the densest and socio-economically diverse
neighborhoods outside the city centre, and also one of the best
preserved nineteenth century districts. This is, in part, due precisely
to the extremely fragmented land ownership pattern of its narrow lots,
which has prevented the consolidation required for large-scale
redevelopment. Haussmanian *percées* by the federal government during
the first half of the twentieth century end up opening several stretches
of this area for the construction of large office buildings, which
compare poorly to the historic fabric in terms of diversity and
pedestrian life.

![Urban development on the former *rossio* of Rio de Janeiro: 100 p. thoroughfare (rua Larga de São Joaquim), 30 p. streets (rua de São Pedro and rua do Sabão) and 25 p. street (cross street), blocks mostly subdivided into 20 p. lots. Detail from Edward Gotto's plan, 1871](){#fig:gotto}

Nevertheless, those *percées* that take place during the first decade of
the twentieth century demonstrate how resilient the Luso-Brazilian
building traditions are. De Paoli has noted one of the goals of these
early urban renewal interventions is to force the consolidation of
narrow lots into broader ones, at least 6 to 7 metres wide (a
measurement reminiscent of the suburban Portuguese 30 p. lot?). However,
several such consolidated lots are redeveloped with two or more
independent structures side by side, rather than one large building
[@paoli:2013outra, 36]. New mixed use buildings granted planning consent
between 1903 and 1908 often preserve the side hallway plan type
([@Fig:saopedro]; compare with [@fig:plans]).

![Approved building application on rua de São Pedro, Rio de Janeiro, c. 1903. Arquivo Geral da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro, reproduced by de Paoli [-@paoli:2013outra]](){#fig:saopedro}

Meanwhile, in 1834, Portugal officially adopts the metric system,
followed much later by Brazil in 1872. Metrification directly impacts
the construction trades and urban subdivision, not the least because it
is accompanied by a surge in new municipal and national regulations on
building and urban development. An evidence of these changes is recorded
in the urban fabric of the Portuguese city of Oporto, which grows
significantly over the course of the nineteenth century due to
industrial development. The earlier growth spurs, along pre-existing
roads, exhibit traditional urban lot frontages 20 or 25 p. wide. On the
rua do Almada, a new thoroughfare opened in 1761 but only developed much
later, on the other hand, lots are standardised at 5 metres wide
([@Fig:almada]).

![Different lot standards before and after metrification in Oporto. Base map by Augusto Carlos Teles Ferreira, 1892](){#fig:almada}

Metrification and the ensuing drive for ever more comprehensive building
regulations are also at play in early twentieth century São Paulo,
Brazil's own industrial powerhouse. Lemos observes that a positivistic
will to 'improve' low-income housing in that city
[@lemos:1999republica]. Turn of the century regulations deal chiefly
with natural lighting and ventilation requirements in some (not all, at
first) rooms of the house. This results, at first, in conservative (and
inconvenient) designs where the side hallway becomes an open court; only
later do actual side setbacks become common, requiring wider lots.

Even as the example of São Paulo contributes to the dissemination of
side yard houses throughout Brazil in the early twentieth century,
Portuguese builders take a different approach to the mandate of natural
lighting and ventilation. Several public and private developments of the
early twentieth century, especially in the centre and south of Portugal,
experiment with a traditional suburban housing type made up of four
cells arranged in a square, with or without a hallway. A number of
variations on this type are to be found at Entroncamento, a railway
junction new town from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
[@paixao:2016bairros].

Conclusion
==========

Portuguese and Brazilian town building traditions remain sensibly stable
for over five centuries, from the mid thirteenth to the early nineteenth
century.

[^1]: @orr:2018five. I am thankful to Douglas Duany for introducing me
to Orr's concept of a 'block of blocks.'
